README.md, before:

Git-Optimized WordPress
=======================

This repository contains a Git-optimized boilerplate structure for WordPress websites. It incorporates security best practices

*Note: While this project uses Git for version control, the structure itself is software-agnostic. With a few minor modifications it could be used with any version control software, such as [Subversion](https://subversion.apache.org/).*

##### What's different?
 * WordPress is installed in its own subdirectory (`cms/`).
 * The active `wp-content/` subdirectory is located at the project root. 
 * The `wp-config.php` file is designed for inclusion in the project repository. It now contains only general project data and not sensitive, environment-specific data, such as database credentials or salts & keys.
 * This sensitive information is now contained in a localized config file that, for added security, has the option of being placed outside of the web root.
 * There is a template for the localized config file (`sample-config.php`).
 * There is a security-optimized `.htaccess` file.
 * There is a preconfigured `.gitignore` file.
 * Composer is used to install WordPress and any theme or plugin dependencies. There is a pre-configured `composer.json` file.

Setting up a new project repository
-----------------------------------

 1. Navigate into the project directory.
 2. Clone this repository: `git clone https://github.com/quayzar/git-optimized-wordpress.git .`
 3. Delete the `.git` directory to separate your files from this repository: `rm -rf .git`
 4. Update `wp-config.php` with default [salts & keys](https://api.wordpress.org/secret-key/1.1/salt/).
 5. If SSL is enabled, uncomment the `Force site through SSL` section of `wp-login.php` and `Redirect site through SSL` section of `.htaccess`.
 5. Create a new, project-specific repository:
```
git init
git add .
git commit -m 'initial commit'
```
 6\. [Push your local repository to GitHub](http://quayzar.com/git/pushing-a-local-repository-to-github/).
 
Installation
------------

Once your project repository has been set up, there are two remaining tasks: create a localized config file and install WordPress.

##### Creating a localized config file
 1. Create an empty database. Note the host, database name, username, and password, as you'll need them shortly.
 2. Copy `sample-config.php` to create a localized config file, replacing "sample" in the new name with "local", "dev", or "live", depending on the environment. Save it either at the web root (on the same level as `wp-config.php`) or, for enhanced security, one level up. [Read more here.](http://wordpress.stackexchange.com/questions/58391/is-moving-wp-config-outside-the-web-root-really-beneficial/74972#74972)
 3. Open this new file and make the following changes:
  * Provide `ADDL_SUBDIR` (if any).
  * Enter the database credentials.
  * [Generate](https://api.wordpress.org/secret-key/1.1/salt/) and add environment-specific salts & keys.
  * Configure the debug settings.
  * Remove the `die` warning at the bottom.

Running `git status` at this point should return neither modifications nor untracked files.

##### Installing & configuring WordPress
This project uses [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) both to install WordPress (hat-tip to [John P. Bloch](https://github.com/johnpbloch/wordpress)) and to manage any theme or plugin dependencies. If you don't already have Composer, [install it locally](https://getcomposer.org/download/).

Note: These instructions assume a global installation of Composer. If Composer is installed locally, replace `composer` in all the commands with `php composer.phar`.

Unless you've only just installed Composer, it's a good idea to run `composer self-update` before getting started.

 1. Open `composer.json`, add any plugin or theme dependencies at the bottom of the `"require"` section, and save. There is both a plugin ([Akismet](https://wordpress.org/plugins/akismet/)) and a theme ([Twenty Sixteen](https://wordpress.org/themes/twentysixteen/)) already in this section for reference. If you edit the dependencies, add the changes to the repository: `git add composer.json`
 2. Run Composer to install WordPress and all dependencies: `composer install`
 3. Add the Composer-generated lock file to the repository: `git add composer.lock`
 4. If you have any theme dependencies (such as a parent theme) that shouldn't be in the repository, adjust `.gitignore` to reflect, then add the changes to the repository: `git add .gitignore`
 5. Run `git status` to confirm all modified or untracked files have been either added or ignored, then commit the changes.
 6. Load the project URL in a browser window. Complete the WordPress installation form and submit.
 7. Log into the WordPress backend.
 8. Select `Settings > Permalinks`, then update the Permalink structures and save. If you don't receive the "Permalinks structure updated" success message, adjust write permissions on `.htaccess` and try again.
 9. Remove `README.md` (recommended) and `LICENSE` (optional).

You now have a working Git-optimized installation of WordPress. Proceed with in-WordPress configuration: Activate plugins, import data, customize theme, etc.

Deployment
----------

Before deployment, review `composer.json` to confirm it reflects the current dependency set. Do not run `composer update` unless you are prepared to perform compatibility testing prior to deployment. If you do modify `composer.json`, commit those changes to your repository on GitHub:
```
git add composer.json
git commit -m 'update composer.json to reflect current dependencies'
git push
```

 1. SSH to the target host and navigate to the web root.
 2. Clone your repository.
 3. Follow the instructions listed under [Creating a localized config file](#creating-a-localized-config-file) above.
 4. [Install Composer](https://getcomposer.org/download/) (if not already installed).
 5. Create a blank `.htaccess` file and set permissions: `touch .htaccess && chmod 0644 .htaccess`
 6. Run Composer to install WordPress and all dependencies: `composer install`
 7. Load the project URL in a browser window. Complete the WordPress installation form and submit. 
 8. Log into the WordPress backend.
 9. Click `Settings > Permalinks`, then update the Permalink structures and save. If you don't receive the "Permalinks structure updated" success message, adjust write permissions on `.htaccess` and try again.
 10. Perform in-WordPress configuration.

Commit message:

add essential plugins to composer.json, edits to README

README.md, after:

Git-Optimized WordPress
=======================

This repository contains a Git-optimized boilerplate structure for WordPress websites. It incorporates security best practices to harden the WordPress structure

*Note: While this project uses Git for version control, the structure itself is software-agnostic. With a few minor modifications it could be used with any version control software, such as [Subversion](https://subversion.apache.org/).*

##### What's different?
 * WordPress is installed in its own subdirectory (`cms/`).
 * The active `wp-content/` subdirectory is located at the project root. 
 * The `wp-config.php` file is designed for inclusion in the project repository. It now contains only general project data and not sensitive, environment-specific data, such as database credentials or salts & keys.
 * This sensitive information is now contained in a localized config file that, for added security, has the option of being placed outside of the web root.
 * There is a template for the localized config file (`sample-config.php`).
 * There is a security-optimized `.htaccess` file.
 * There is a preconfigured `.gitignore` file.
 * Composer is used to install WordPress and any theme or plugin dependencies. There is a pre-configured `composer.json` file.

Setting up a new project repository
-----------------------------------

 1. Navigate into the project directory.
 2. Clone this repository: `git clone https://github.com/quayzar/git-optimized-wordpress.git .`
 3. Delete the `.git` directory to separate your files from this repository: `rm -rf .git`
 4. Update `wp-config.php` with default [salts & keys](https://api.wordpress.org/secret-key/1.1/salt/).
 5. If SSL is enabled, uncomment the `Force site through SSL` section of `wp-login.php` and `Redirect site through SSL` section of `.htaccess`.
 6. Create a new, project-specific repository:
```
git init
git add .
git commit -m 'initial commit'
```
 6\. [Push your local repository to GitHub](http://quayzar.com/git/pushing-a-local-repository-to-github/).
 
Installation
------------

Once your project repository has been set up, there are two remaining tasks: create a localized config file and install WordPress.

##### Creating a localized config file
 1. Create an empty database. Note the host, database name, username, and password, as you'll need them shortly.
 2. Copy `sample-config.php` to create a localized config file, replacing "sample" in the new name with "local", "dev", or "live", depending on the environment. Save it either at the web root (on the same level as `wp-config.php`) or, for enhanced security, one level up. [Read more here.](http://wordpress.stackexchange.com/questions/58391/is-moving-wp-config-outside-the-web-root-really-beneficial/74972#74972)
 3. Open this new file and make the following changes:
  * Provide `ADDL_SUBDIR` (if any).
  * Enter the database credentials.
  * [Generate](https://api.wordpress.org/secret-key/1.1/salt/) and add environment-specific salts & keys.
  * Configure the debug settings.
  * Remove the `die` warning at the bottom.

Running `git status` at this point should return neither modifications nor untracked files.

##### Installing & configuring WordPress
This project uses [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) both to install WordPress (hat-tip to [John P. Bloch](https://github.com/johnpbloch/wordpress)) and to manage any theme or plugin dependencies. If you don't already have Composer, [install it locally](https://getcomposer.org/download/).

Note: These instructions assume a global installation of Composer. If Composer is installed locally, replace `composer` in all the commands with `php composer.phar`.

Unless you've only just installed Composer, it's a good idea to run `composer self-update` before getting started.

 1. Open `composer.json`, add any plugin or theme dependencies at the bottom of the `"require"` section, and save. There are a few recommended plugins ([Akismet](https://wordpress.org/plugins/akismet/), [Duo Two-Factor Authentication](https://wordpress.org/plugins/duo-wordpress/), [Jetpack](https://wordpress.org/plugins/jetpack/), [Wordfence](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wordfence/), [WP-DBManager](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wp-dbmanager/)) and a theme ([Twenty Sixteen](https://wordpress.org/themes/twentysixteen/)) already in this section for reference. If you edit the dependencies, add the changes to the repository: `git add composer.json`
 2. Run Composer to install WordPress and all dependencies: `composer install`
 3. Add the Composer-generated lock file to the repository: `git add composer.lock`
 4. If you have any theme dependencies (such as a parent theme) that shouldn't be in the repository, adjust `.gitignore` to reflect, then add the changes to the repository: `git add .gitignore`
 5. Run `git status` to confirm all modified or untracked files have been either added or ignored, then commit the changes.
 6. Load the project URL in a browser window. Complete the WordPress installation form and submit.
 7. Log into the WordPress backend.
 8. Select `Settings > Permalinks`, then update the Permalink structures and save. If you don't receive the "Permalinks structure updated" success message, adjust write permissions on `.htaccess` and try again.
 9. Remove `README.md` (recommended) and `LICENSE` (optional).

You now have a working Git-optimized installation of WordPress. Proceed with in-WordPress configuration: Activate plugins, import data, customize theme, etc.

Deployment
----------

Before deployment, review `composer.json` to confirm it reflects the current dependency set. Do not run `composer update` unless you are prepared to perform compatibility testing prior to deployment. If you do modify `composer.json`, commit those changes to your repository on GitHub:
```
git add composer.json
git commit -m 'update composer.json to reflect current dependencies'
git push
```

 1. SSH to the target host and navigate to the web root.
 2. Clone your repository.
 3. Follow the instructions listed under [Creating a localized config file](#creating-a-localized-config-file) above.
 4. [Install Composer](https://getcomposer.org/download/) (if not already installed).
 5. Create a blank `.htaccess` file and set permissions: `touch .htaccess && chmod 0644 .htaccess`
 6. Run Composer to install WordPress and all dependencies: `composer install`
 7. Load the project URL in a browser window. Complete the WordPress installation form and submit. 
 8. Log into the WordPress backend.
 9. Click `Settings > Permalinks`, then update the Permalink structures and save. If you don't receive the "Permalinks structure updated" success message, adjust write permissions on `.htaccess` and try again.
 10. Perform in-WordPress configuration.
